<dc: title> Oscar Micheaux's Within Our Gates

<dcterms: alternative> Today we are thrilled to feature a guest-post
by film critic/cultural historian Sheila O'Malley (Bio Below)

<role: OWN> Sheila O'MalleyÂ 

<role: EDT> Jonathan Goldman

<collex:genre> Article

<dc:date>2020</dc:date>

<collex:text>One hundred years ago today ... pioneering African
American director Oscar Micheaux\'s film *Within Our Gates*, featuring
an African American cast, screened in Harlem at the Lincoln Theater, the
start of a five-day run. The film was promoted by the African American
weekly *The New York Age* as: \"The Greatest Race Drama Ever Shown
Featuring Miss Evelyn Preer and All-Star Colored Cast.\" *Within Our
Gates* would screen a couple months later in Brooklyn at the
Putnam.</collex:text>

<collex:image rdf:resources=" *The New York Age.* 6 May 1920, p. 6.">

<collex:text>Text: The film had a rocky road to being screened at all.
It\'s been said that *Within Our Gates*, written, directed, and produced
by Micheaux, was a direct response to D.W. Griffith\'s racist spectacle
*Birth of a Nation (*1915*),* but the reality was a bit more complex.
Micheaux consciously echoes *Birth of a Nation* stylistically and
structurally; (the film moves from South to North and back, the
flashbacks are woven into the story in ways still fresh and startling in
1920). Allyson Nadia Field observes at Criterion, \"Using Griffith's own
language to disprove his racist assertions, Micheaux's portrayal of a
white lynch mob belies Griffith's depiction of a gallant Klan.\" The
film takes on poverty as well as the lack of education and opportunity,
particularly for those living in the Southern states, and it shows the
issues arising with post-WWI African American life, as well as the Great
Migration. </collex:text>

<collex:image rdf:resources=" *the New York Age.* 6 May 1920, p. 5. ">

<collex:text> Evelyn Preer, a well-known actress of stage and screen
as well as a popular jazz and blues singer, plays Sylvia, a teacher at
an impoverished school in the South, who heads North to ask for
donations to keep the school afloat. Her journey takes place within the
context of Jim Crow laws, the rise of the KKK, and the threat of lynch
mobs. </collex:text> Link: https://youtu.be/h1E0NrcnwAE

<collex:text>With a ripped-from-the-headlines feel, *Within Our Gates*
references the contributions African Americans have made in American
wars, especially in the one that just ended, as well as the death of
Theodore Roosevelt in 1919. At one point, an activist doctor lists the
many contributions African Americans have made to America, urging
Sylvia, \"We were never immigrants. Be proud of your country, always!\"
</collex:text>

<collex:text>Descended from former slaves, Micheaux worked at a
shoeshine stand in Chicago, before moving on to work as a Pullman
porter, a very prestigious job (which would come in handy later when he
needed to hit up rich people for loans to get his films made). The
defining moment for Micheaux appears to be when he bought land in South
Dakota to work as a homesteader. He wrote a novel based on his
experiences (*The Homesteader*), and the Lincoln Motion Picture Company
wanted to turn it into a film. The negotiations broke down, but it gave
Micheaux his idea and inspiration. Why not make the film himself? And
so, he did. He set up the Micheaux Film & Book Company out of Sioux City
and began to make his own films. He eventually produced over 40 films.
</collex:text>

<collex:text>*Within Our Gates* was Micheaux\'s second film. For years
it was considered a lost film, until a print was discovered in the
1970s. It was made during a very jittery year. The end of the war was
followed by a worldwide pandemic which ranged from 1918 into the summer
of 1919, killing untold millions. The summer of 1919 was punctuated by
violent \"race riots\" in many American cities, but mostly Chicago.
Because of this, censor boards were afraid of *Within Our Gates*. The
Chicago Board of Censors took one look at the film and rejected it. They
feared it would stir up violence in \"urban\" audiences.
</collex:text>

<collex:image rdf:resources=" Image: Micheaux. Courtesy Kino Lorber.">

<collex:text>Let us take a moment to recall David Denby\'s now
infamous review of Spike Lee\'s *Do the Right Thing* back in 1989, where
he worried, \"\... if Spike Lee is a commercial opportunist, he's also
playing with dynamite in an urban playground. The response to the movie
could get away from him.\" There were other white critics who worried
along similar lines. Here\'s Joe Klein at *New York Magazine*: \"If Lee
does hook large black audiences, there's a good chance the message they
take from the film will increase racial tensions in the city.\" The more
things change, the more they stay the same. The Chicago Censors reviewed
*Within Our Gates* for two months, before finally allowing it to be
screened. Many cities were scared off, and refused to screen the film at
all. But New York audiences had a chance to see *Within Our Gates*
during its limited run from May 20-24 at Harlem\'s Lincoln Theatre.
Micheaux\'s gravestone reads, truthfully: \"A man ahead of his time.\"
</collex:text>

<dc:description> Higgins, Bill. "Hollywood Flashback: Oscar
Micheaux\'s Pioneering Black Film Studio Was Founded 100 Years Ago." The
Hollywood Reporter, 2 May 2019, "The Lincoln Motion Picture Company, a
First for Black Cinema." The Lincoln Motion Picture Company, a First for
Black Cinema \| African American Registry,

<role:AUT> <dc:description> Sheila O\'Malley is a regular film
critic for Film Comment and
[Rogerebert.com](https://www.rogerebert.com/). She has also written for
Criterion Collection, The New York Times, Los Angeles Times, and Sight &
Sound. She is a member of the New York Film Critics Circle. Her blog is
[The Sheila Variations](http://www.sheilaomalley.com/). On Twitter:
\@sheilakathleen

Tags: Oscar Micheaux, Within Our Gates, cinema, African American cinema,
Evelyn Preer, Lincoln Theater
